Created a draft of messaging-first-architecture (#143)
Zuehlke/software-engineering-corner: src/articles/messaging-first-architecture/index.md

---
title: "Messaging-First Architectures: Resilient Systems with Azure Service Bus"
description: >-
    This article provides a high-level overview of messaging-first architectures using Azure Service Bus. Based on experience from a large retail platform project, it outlines important concepts such as service decoupling, retries, dead-letter queues, observability, and common pitfalls when moving from synchronous APIs to asynchronous messaging—focusing on architectural insights rather than detailed code or configuration.
released: '2026-03-09T16:20:00.243Z'
author: Gayatri Potawad
tags:
  - Azure
  - architecture
  - software-architecture
  - messaging
  - motivation
  - microservice
cover: images/cover.jpg
shortDescription: >-
    A short overview of messaging-first architectures using Azure Service Bus, highlighting key concepts, design considerations, and practical observations from a real project.
---

# Messaging-First Architectures: Resilient Systems with Azure Service Bus 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Markdown Style: there's no need to add mutliple lines, since Markdown treats multiple blank lines as one blank line.

In one of my previous projects, I worked on a large-scale retail platform where nearly every critical business flow from orders to inventory updates relied on Azure Service Bus. This was my first dive into a messaging-first architecture on Azure. 

> This blog is my attempt to capture what I learned and design principles that shaped the system and hopefully help anyone walking a similar path, especially if you’re transitioning from synchronous REST-based APIs to asynchronous messaging. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog is my attempt to capture what I learned and design principles that shaped the system and hopefully help anyone walking a similar path—especially if you’re transitioning from synchronous REST-based APIs to asynchronous messaging. 
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

 
## 1. Azure Service Bus 

Azure Service Bus is a fully managed enterprise message broker that enables decoupled communication between services using queues and topics. 

> If you’ve worked with something like ActiveMQ, Kafka, or RabbitMQ, a lot will feel familiar, but Azure adds cloud-native features like auto-scaling, integration with Azure Functions, and dead-letter handling. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’ve worked with something like ActiveMQ, Kafka, or RabbitMQ, much of this will feel familiar. However, Azure adds cloud-native features like auto-scaling, integration with Azure Functions, and dead-letter handling.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## 2. Why & When Messaging-First? 

> In most of the systems I’ve worked on, HTTP APIs were the standard architectural approach, where service A calls service B often in a tightly coupled sequence. That works fine for many workflows, especially when you need quick, direct responses. But in a recent project, we leaned into a messaging-first approach using Azure Service Bus. Instead of services calling each other directly, they communicated through messages and that changed a lot. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most of the systems I’ve worked on, HTTP APIs have been the standard architectural approach, with service A calling service B—often in a tightly coupled sequence. This works well for many workflows, especially when quick, direct responses are needed. However, in a recent project, we adopted a messaging-first approach using Azure Service Bus. Instead of services calling each other directly, they communicated through messages.
```

Reviewer: what do you mean by "that changed a lot"?

> It wasn’t about replacing REST, but about picking the right model for the problem. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It wasn’t just about replacing REST, but about picking the right model for the problem.
```

> Messaging brought clear benefits in areas like: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Messaging brought clear benefits in the following areas:

```

> - Decoupling services so they could evolve independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Decoupling services so they could evolve independently
```

> - Smoothing out traffic spikes with queues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Smoothing out traffic spikes with queues
```

> - Handling retries and failures more gracefully. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Handling retries and failures more gracefully
```

Reviewer: There’s no need to add a period here, as the list item is not a complete sentence.

That said, messaging isn't a silver bullet. It introduces latency and adds complexity in tracking, ordering, and debugging. 

> But where it fits, especially in async-heavy workflows, it can make systems more resilient and scalable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, when a messaging-first approach fits well—especially in async-heavy workflows—it can make systems more resilient and scalable.
```

For me, messaging-first became less about abandoning APIs, and more about using the right tool where it made sense. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## 3. Designing Around the Bus 

> In a messaging-first architecture, the Service Bus becomes the backbone of your system. Services are designed to react to messages, rather than respond to requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a messaging-first architecture, the Service Bus becomes the backbone of the system. Services are designed to react to messages rather than respond to requests.
```

> We might think "If everything goes through Service Bus, isn’t that a single point of failure?” 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might think: “If everything goes through the Service Bus, isn’t that a single point of failure?”
```

The reality is, Azure Service Bus (especially on the Premium tier) is built for high availability. 

> It’s redundant across zones, fully managed, and handles all the scaling, patching, and infrastructure stuff behind the scenes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s redundant across zones, fully managed, and handles scaling, patching, and infrastructure concerns behind the scenes.
```

You’re not babysitting a broker; Microsoft does that for you. 

That said, putting messaging at the center of your system does mean you have to take it seriously. 

> Things like Dead Letter Queues, lock timeouts, or message retries can become blind spots if you’re not monitoring them properly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Things like dead-letter queues, lock timeouts, or message retries can become blind spots if they’re not properly monitored.
```

> The team had to invest in observability early; logs, alerts, correlation IDs to make sure we weren’t flying blind. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The team has to invest in observability early—logs, alerts, and correlation IDs—to make sure they aren’t flying blind.
```

Reviewer: past tense is wrong here.

> So yes, Service Bus is central. But with the right setup, it’s not fragile. In fact, it ended up being the most reliable part of the stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So yes, the Service Bus is central. With the right setup, it isn’t fragile—in fact, it can become the most reliable part of the stack.
```

> Overview of a simple ordering service with minimal processes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image below provides an overview of a simple ordering service with minimal processes.
```

> ![Overview of a simple ordering service with minimal processes ](https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1750763150332/cwv8WTrXn.png?auto=format)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Overview of a simple ordering service with minimal processes](https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1750763150332/cwv8WTrXn.png?auto=format)
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## 4. DLQs Done Right 

Reviewer: The term dead-letter queue (DLQ) has been mentioned many times before. Please introduce the abbreviation the first time you use the term.

> Dead-letter queues (DLQs) are where messages end up when something goes wrong — too many delivery attempts, serialization issues, or unhandled exceptions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dead-letter queues (DLQs) are where messages end up when something goes wrong—such as too many delivery attempts, serialization issues, or unhandled exceptions.
```

> In our case, DLQs turned out to be a quiet but critical signal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our case, DLQs turned out to be a quiet but critical indicator. 
```

> We started seeing messages pile up in the DLQ, with reasons like "Max Delivery Attempts Exceeded." At first glance, it wasn’t obvious what the problem was — the functions were technically healthy. But when we dug deeper, we realized that the Azure Service Bus was retrying deliveries because our functions were simply taking too long to respond. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We started seeing messages pile up in the DLQ, with reasons such as "Max Delivery Attempts Exceeded". At first glance, it wasn’t obvious what the problem was—the functions were technically healthy—but when we dug deeper, we realised that the Azure Service Bus was retrying deliveries because our functions were simply taking too long to respond—not because they were failing, but because they were slowing down under high CPU load.
```

Reviewer: Are we using the British or the American English Spelling? Because I assumed that we are using the British English Spelling.

> Not because they failed but because they slowed down under high CPU load. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The root cause? Several functions running in the same App Service Plan were fighting for compute. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The root cause? Several functions running in the same App Service Plan were competing for compute resources.
```

> CPU was hitting 100%, and as a result, some functions would time out after Azure Service Bus’s default 5-minute lock duration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CPU was hitting 100%, and as a result, some functions would time out after Azure Service Bus’s default five-minute lock duration.
```

Reviewer: spell out numbers under 10 in formal prose

> Since there weren’t clear diagnostic logs from Service Bus indicating a timeout, we had to correlate it ourselves using App Insights and DLQ metadata. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since there were no clear diagnostic logs from Service Bus indicating a timeout, we had to correlate the issue ourselves using App Insights and DLQ metadata.
```

> The fix: We tuned the App Service to auto-scale more aggressively aiming to bring the CPU load down within 10 minutes (two timeouts) instead of letting it hover for 30 minutes (more than 5 timeouts). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fix: we tuned the App Service to auto-scale more aggressively, aiming to bring the CPU load down within 10 minutes (two timeouts), instead of letting it hover for 30 minutes (more than five timeouts).
```

> Once that was in place, the DLQ entries dropped, and message flow stabilized. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once that was in place, the DLQ entries dropped, and the message flow stabilized. 
```

> Moral of the story: DLQs don’t just catch errors they reveal when your system is struggling. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moral of the story: DLQs don’t just catch errors—they reveal when your system is struggling.
```

> They can help you fine-tune not just code but scaling policies too. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can help you fine-tune not just code, but also scaling policies.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## 5. Retry Strategies 

> Azure Service Bus provides built-in retry handling, but you can (and often should) tune it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Azure Service Bus provides built-in retry handling, but you can—and often should—tune it. 
```

> - maxDeliveryCount controls how many times a message is retried before DLQ. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- maxDeliveryCount controls how many times a message is retried before it is moved to the DLQ
```

> - Set autoComplete to false so you can complete processing only on success. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set autoComplete to false so you can complete processing only on success
```

> - Use custom retry queues or scheduled retries for long tail errors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use custom retry queues or scheduled retries for long tail errors
```

> Coming from Java, this felt a bit like using Spring Retry but without needing annotations, you control retries in your message loop or function binding. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coming from Java, this felt a bit like using Spring Retry, but without needing annotations—you control retries in your message loop or function binding.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## 6. Observability + Fail-Safes 

> A messaging-first system only works if you can see what’s happening. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A messaging-first system only works if you can see what’s happening.

```

> - Enable diagnostic settings to stream logs and metrics to Log Analytics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enable diagnostic settings to stream logs and metrics to Log Analytics
```

> - Add Application Insights and propagate correlation IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add Application Insights and propagate correlation IDs
```

> - Include message IDs and payloads (truncated!) in logs for traceability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Include message IDs and payloads (truncated for traceability) in logs
```

> - Track processing times and delivery counts to detect slow consumers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Track processing times and delivery counts to detect slow consumers
```

  
⚠️ Note of Caution:

> Don’t treat observability as an afterthought - it’s a classic case of spoiling the ship for a ha’porth of tar. Skimping on logging and telemetry might save a little now, but it'll cost far more when failures strike and you're flying blind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don’t treat observability as an afterthought—it’s a classic case of spoiling the ship for a ha’porth of tar. Skimping on logging and telemetry might save a little time and effort now, but it will cost far more when failures strike and you're flying blind.
```

Reviewer: "spoiling the ship for a ha’porth of tar", I like this one!

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## 7. Gotchas to Avoid 

> Even with a solid design, there are a few sharp edges in messaging-first systems; here are the mistakes we ran into (so you hopefully don’t have to): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even with a solid design, there are a few sharp edges in messaging-first systems. Here are the mistakes we ran into (so you hopefully don’t have to): 
```

> - Ignoring DLQs 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ignoring DLQs

```

> It’s easy to treat DLQs like a trash bin. DLQs often surface subtle bugs, timeouts, or performance issues we might otherwise miss. We learned to monitor them like a first-class signal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s easy to treat DLQs like a trash bin but they often surface subtle bugs, timeouts, or performance issues we might otherwise miss. We learned to monitor them as a first-class signal. 
```

> - Sending Large Messages 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sending Large Messages

```

> Messages over 256 KB can silently fail. While we didn’t hit this ourselves, it’s a common pitfall. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Messages over 256 KB can fail silently. While we didn’t encounter this ourselves, it’s a common pitfall. 
```

If you’re close to the limit, compress the payload or store large data in blob storage and just pass a reference. 

> - Lock Timeouts 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Lock Timeouts

```

> By default, a message lock lasts 30 seconds. If your function or processor takes longer, Azure will think it failed and redeliver the message. We observed implementing lock renewal, increases processing efficiency to avoid duplicate executions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, a message lock lasts 30 seconds. If your function or processor takes longer, Azure will assume it has failed and redeliver the message. We found that implementing lock renewal increased processing efficiency and helped avoid duplicate executions.
```

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Wrapping Up 

> This project really changed the way I think about service communication. Messaging-first isn’t just about queues and topics. It’s about designing for resilience, decoupling, and scale from day one.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project really changed the way I think about service communication. Messaging-first isn’t just about queues and topics; it’s about designing for resilience, decoupling, and scale from day one.  
```

But here’s the nuance: messaging-first doesn’t mean messaging-only. 

> Some interactions are still best done synchronously like fetching user details for a UI in real time or validating input. The real strength comes from knowing where async fits best: background jobs, cross-system workflows, retries, or anything that shouldn’t block the user. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some interactions are still best done synchronously, such as fetching user details for a UI in real time or validating input. The real strength comes from knowing where async fits best: background jobs, cross-system workflows, retries, or anything that shouldn’t block the user.
```

> Systems can be hybrid. It’s not one or the other. It’s about picking the right tool for the job. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Systems can be hybrid. It’s not one or the other; it’s about picking the right tool for the job. 
```

> If you're building distributed systems on Azure, or transitioning from a synchronous mindset like I was, I hope this gives you a good head start. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’re building distributed systems on Azure, or transitioning from a synchronous mindset like I was, I hope this gives you a good head start.
```
